Good evening everyone. Thank you for coming tonight.
This meeting has been organized by the association Mémoire des luttes (Remembering struggles)
of which I am a member, and my name is Christophe Ventura.
So we had the idea of organizing a dialogue, and I insist on this word, for it is neither a conference nor a meeting,
between Chantal Mouffe and Jean-Luc Mélenchon.
So tonight we are going to deal with political philosophy,
and the idea is to tackle different subjects that are fundamental in the work and the personal history of our guests,
but subjects that are also part of the... let us say of the constant media background noise,
and these are the people and populism.
We will wonder how to define these concepts, how to tackle and use them.
Tonight's objective is to confront the works and theories of Chantal Mouffe with those of Jean-Luc Mélenchon,
who, as the candidate of La France Insoumise in the 2017 presidential campaign,
applies some of his ideas within the framework of an election campaign.
We will therefore try to examine all these subjects tonight.
We will proceed as follows:
the evening has been organized around six topics or thematical points
that will be freely discussed by Chantal Mouffe and Jean-Luc Mélenchon.
They will have the possibility to answer each other,
to develop the points that according to them need to be clarified.
Okay, so let us start without further delay, we have two hours, so this debate should end around 9 p.m.
I hope you will enjoy this debate.
So let us start. The first topic we that we will discuss is very simple,
we often talk about the people, but is there such a thing as the people? What do we mean by the people?
Is it an effective category? Is it merely a catch-all term? Is the people a permanent category?
Is today's people the same as it was one, two or three centuries ago? Are players the same?
If not, if players are different, should we consider new ways of speaking with the people, of mobilizing the people then?
Our discussion will be concerned with these subjects.
I will now give the floor to Chantal Mouffe who is a professor in political theory.
She recently published "On the Political"?.
Of course Chantal assisted Ernesto Laclau in his research on populism and hegemony for a long time.
One of their most famous works, 'Hegemony and Socialist Strategy', was released 30 years ago.
Their work was very concerned about the Latin-American realities, Argentina particularly,
and had a significant influence on a number of intellectual or political players,
and even on political movements, as in the case of Spain.
Chantal Mouffe's work is often associated with the strategy o the Spanish movement Podemos, she will give us her opinion on that.
So Chantal Mouffe, does 'the people' exist? And what do we mean by 'the people'?
CM: What I think might be shocking, but no, 'the people' does not exist.
Let me explain. It is not an empirical reality.
JLM: You should speak in the mic.
(...)
CM: Does it work? Ok, good.
So the people is not an empirical entity. Population is an empirical entity.
The people as a political category is always a construction, a discursive construction.
Maybe I should explain what I mean, because people think that discourse is only a linguistic category.
In "Hegemony and Socialist Strategy", the book Ernesto Laclau and I wrote,
we explain what we mean by the category of discourse, and we say that society is always a discursive space.
But we use the term discourse to refer to a set of practices.
I insist on that, because discourse is usually considered to be an idealist position but it's not.
The people is something that is built through a series of practices, of discourses
and of what I consider a very important element, affects. I will  develop this idea later on.
The people is always a construction.
Maybe we should highlight something that is important for understanding the way the people builds itself.
This depends on how we conceive politics. As I said, the people is a political category.
Our way of conceiving politics decides our way of conceiveing how the people builds itself.
All things considered, there are two fundamental ways of conceiving politics.
There is what we call the associative conception and the dissociative conception.
The associative conception see politics as an area of freedom where we can all meet, cooperate and come to an agreement.
The dissociative conception also believes in cooperation, but within a society that is necessarily made of antagonisms.
In this conception, antagonisms and conflicts are the essence of politics,
because if antagonisms and conflicts did not exist, politics would be unnecessary.
It is very important to understand this first, and of course I share the dissociative conception.
I support the idea that in building itself, the people creates a collective identity, a 'we',
but  to do so, it has to determine a 'they'.
In this conception, antagonisms are inherent to society.
As a matter of fact, I share a conception of politics that goes back to Machiavelli.
Machiavelli said that every society was made of a fundamental conflict between two 'umori'.
On the one hand, there are the 'grandi', those who have power, today's oligarchy,
and on the other hand, there is the 'popolo', the basis, that defends itself.
According to hil, this is something that exists in every society.
It is important to understand that society is necessarily divided to understand what I will develop later on.
Society is divided, political identities are always collective constructions,
and politics is about determining a 'we' and a 'they'.
Politics is always about chosing one side or another.
When we try to understand how the people builds itself,
we can always see different constructions competing with one another.
What makes a difference between them is the way to build the 'we' and the 'they' that are opposed.
Another issue concerns the relationship between the 'we' and the 'they'.
When we talk about the people, we always have to think about what kind of people we want to build,
and what kind of 'they' this people will be opposed to.
(...)
JLM: Chantal just set the stage for an idea that I take up, that of the people building itself as a subjective category,
defining itself as a 'we', as opposed to 'they',
and as far as I am concerned, the people versus oligarchy.
But I belong to the philosophical tradition of historical materialism, and as a consequence,
in developing the theory of the citizens' revolution, I primarily focused on the people as a physical or material reality.
I asked myself where it came from, what it was and how I could name it, as you did.
Of course, I integrated the idea that this reality was the result of history.
What we called 'the people' in the 18th century or during the French Revolution has nothing to do with what we call 'the people' today.
Why? Because an event occured, and I'll come back to it, but I want to add that in my book "The Age of the People",
I gave a positive definition of the people, meaning I did not define it in relation to the old way of conceiving the people,
rather, I gave my own definition.
In the first words of the book, I used a quotation from "One Hundred Years of Solitude" by Garcia Màrquez,
when Colonel Aureliano Buendia remembers the past in front of the firing squad.
At this moment, he says that when he was young, this world was so recent that many things lacked names,
and in order to indicate them it was necessary to point.
As a consesquence, I point at something that I call 'the people',
but your conception of the people, which is always unclear, as is always the case with the term 'people',
might not correspond to what I call 'the people' as a material reality.
This is the first step for understanding my methodology.
So what happened?
I belong to a historical tradition that conceives history as the history of class struggle for the appropriation of wealth.
This is the starting point of the basic lateralization that Chantal speaks of,
between the proletarian and the bourgeois, between those who own the means of production and their subordinates.
It is this contradiction that gives birth to the political field, along with its fundamental meaning. They are rooted in material reality.
So what happened? (according to me at least, I answer the question from the angle you tackled it)
I figured out that previous to the possibility of class struggle, another phenomenon had to occur,
and this phenomenon is quantity.
By this I mean that a certain quantity of human beings producing their livelihood  is necessary
before some of them begin to appropriate a part of what the  rest produced.
As a consequence, I came to the conclusion that history is the result of the fluctuation of the quantity of human beings,
as are class struggle and the rest of the conflicts that oppose human beings.
If need be, I can develop this idea, although I don't want to start a conference,
but there is a very close connection between the quantity of human beings
and the development of science and technologies in such and such era.
This can be demonstrated if we use the opposite example:
when the quantity of human beings dicreases in a society, when this society isolates itself from the rest of human beings,
it goes through a decline, not only in the number of tools it uses,
but also in the quality of their design and the scientific requirements needed to obtain these tools.
The connection does exist, but it was unvisible in the beginning of the history of humanity,
because humanity began with small groups.
We had to wait for the year 1800 to reach the first billion of human beings,
and since then, the quantity of human beings has increased in a breathtaking way.
I was born at a time when the global population was 2.3 billion,
whereas there are 7 billions of human beings today, and there will be 10 very soon.
Therefore, this huge quantity of human beings modifies itself precisely because of its quantity,
because it becomes urbanized, 80% of the global population is urbanized,
and because its composition diversifies as it grows.
Contrary to what one might think, the more population grows, the more individuals are unique.
So the increase in quantity singles out human beings
and enables individuals to become the players of their own history.
My third point is that everyone is part of, lives inside and through networks.
I am not only talking about social networks, but also about electricity and gas networks, about roads, buildings and all these things.
The proletariat can be considered the first organized social network
because of its size, its mass and the organization of its housing.
But what I call 'the people' today is this huge urban population, that is interdependent,
spatially organized according to social hierarchies that result from the distribution of wealth in society.
Does the people manifest itself materially and physically in a revolutionary process?
As I belong to the tradition of materialism, I am particularly interested in this issue.
Well the answer is yes, in a revolutionary process, the people manifests itselfs materially.
This can be observed nowadays thanks to those communication tools we call smartphones.
Once again, contrary to what one might think, we massively communicate because of proximity, not because of distance.
Communication is more intense within urban areas than within rural areas, or from rural to urban areas,
and one of the characteristics of revolutionary periods is the intensification of communication networks.
Here we have the material demonstration of an old phrase uttered by Leon Trotsky.
He said that when the people, no sorry, he did not use that word,
when the proletariat or society begin a revolution,
social temperature increases and information circulates more quickly.
This is precisely what happens, in a presidential election for instance,
in the beginning of a campaign, a piece of information needs a month to circulate among the population,
whereas two or three days before the vote, any piece of information is transmitted all around the country in less than an hour,
because everyone is impassioned.
To summarize, today's people is not the people of the 18th or the 19th century.
What I call 'the people' is the networked Homo Urbanus, and I describe it in two conditions:
First, its initial form, that Marxism described as...
Marxism used to talk about the working class in itself,
meaning the working class defined by its position in social relations.
Marx used a phrase that may sound like a magic formula,
or the phrase of an idealist in the philosophical sense, since we are  criticized for being idealists,
He said "The proletariat is revolutionary or it is nothing".
If we give it some thought, how could the proletariat, a real and material category, described by a model of social relations,
how could it cease to exist if it is not conscious of its own existence.
I describe the people in the same way.
There is the people in itself, meaning the multitude or population, as Chantal Mouffe just said.
CM: The multitude is a different concept.
JLM: Yes I know that...
CM: We should not mix concepts, because the concept of the multitude is used by many theorists,
like antonio Negri for instance, it's important to make a difference between them.
I agree that there is a distinction between the proletariat and the people,
but to me, the multitude is something different.
I think it is important to clarify categories.
When I think about... I mean...
I'm interested in understanding how the people builds itself politically today.
Something important is at stake here.
First, as you said, it is true that some still talk about the proletariat,
whereas some prefer the category of the people.
I think this choice has important consequences.
Given the recent transformations of capitalism, we can no longer use terms or concepts that
were pertinent in the past but that are...
Maybe we will discuss this later on, are we not?
How...? I don't want to rush because I think we will discuss this later on,
but I think we also wanted to talk about the relation between the people and democracy.
Christophe Ventura: Yes, except if Jean-Luc has something to add.
JLM: I'll just finish what I was saying.
I used the word 'multitude' because I was looking for words that would not stumble against one another.
I might have used 'population', since it is a translation of the greek words 'laos', 'demos' or 'genos',
which are three ways of naming population with different characteristics.
I used 'multitude', not in the sense of Toni Negri and others, but in the sense of a crowd
heading to and fro within the city, entering or leaving the elevator, going to or coming back from work,
or having no job... CM: Yes, that's what I call 'population'.
JLM: Yes, it is probably the correct word, but it was harder for me to say the 'population becomes the people',
this was a possibility, but I prefered using 'multitude' to refer to the people in itself,
that is, thousands of people with different social conditions, different hobbies,
that become the people through a political decision described by Chantal Mouffe.
I mean, the people as a body politic is a construction, a self-construction,
that defines itself as a 'we' in opposition to 'they',
and here we share a common view.
I wanted to emphasize the materialist path that led me to your ideas.
Just one last word to make sure you understand what I'm saying.
To me, the concept of people does not erase the concepts of proletariat and salariat.
The people contains the salariat and the proletariat,
and very often, the latter plays a role within the people
that helps the people to become aware of the 'we'.
Let me cite a concrete example taken from a revolutionary period,
that of the General Union of Tunisian Workers, that played a role in the revolutionary process in Tunisia.
In each district, the union explained to people how to organize a neighboorhood committee,
because only the union had experienced the self-organization of masses.
But compared to a factory committee,
organizing a neighboorhood committee at the onset of a revolutionary process is a completely different story.
At the risk of talking too much, let me cite the opposite example,
when there were demonstrations in Brasil against the building of facilities for the Football World Cup,
people surged into the streets. It looked like a demonstration against the government,
but some friends said no, this is a left-wing demonstration,
so we asked a friend, one of the leaders of the Landless Workers' Movement,
why he considered this demonstration  against the government a left -wing demonstration.
He almost felt compelled to say that it was because petitions also circulated within factories,
but he did not think for a minute that it was a left demonstration
precisely because the people was in the street to assert its sovereignty.
This is our money, and we don't want to build football stadiums with it, we want to build public transport.
Therefore the people becomes a body politic by asserting its own sovereignty.
So much for the concept, I just wanted to show how Chantal's ideas matched mine,
although we do not use the same words.
CM: Yes. I think we will have to discuss this at some point.
The people does not necesarily builds itself in a progressive way.
If we want to understand populism, we need to keep that in mind for later.
CV: Yes, we will discuss this later in the debate.
So, now that you defined the category of the people,
we will try to focus on another aspect.
Today, it is fashionable to say we live in post-political democracies,
democracies whose characteristic is consensus,
in which conflicts or antagonistic policies are undesirable.
So we will discuss this, and now that we defined the people,
how can we build a relation between the people and democracy?
Is the people an asset or a problem for democracy? This question might be surprising,
and yet, the media keeps on asking this question.
So let us deal with it, I'm giving the floor to Chantal.
CM: Ok, so I would like to deal with the issue of the relation between the people and democracy on a conceptual level,
because it also questions the issue of populism.
Of course, there cannot be a democracy without the people
Etymologically, what does 'democracy' mean?
It comes from 'demos' and 'cratos', that is, the power of the 'demos'
and precisely, the 'demos' means the people as a political category.
Therefore, there cannot be a democracy without the construction of a people.
Nicole Loreau pointed out something very important, 'cratos' means to have the upper hand.
Therefore, as I said earlier, 'demos-cratos' means that the people is divided,
because a part of the people has the 'cratos' over the rest.
In "Hegemony and Socialist Strategy", Ernesto and I developed the concept of hegemony.
It means that power relations are inherent to democracy,
and democracy can in no way aim at building a sort of consensus that would include everyone's opinion.
It is not at all undemocratic to recognize the existence of hegemonic positions,
or the 'cratos' of a group over the rest.
So there cannot be a democracy without a people,
which is why I insist on the fact that... some people do not like this idea,
but to me, democracy necessarily ecompasses a populist dimension
because I define populism as the construction of the people.
If we accept the idea that there cannot be a democracy without a people,
then the people always ecompasses a populist dimension.
This why I am opposed to those who affirm that populism is a pathology or a perversion of democracy.
Populism is an absolutely fundamental element of democracy.
In order to understand democracy's current situation,
it is necessary to understand that the European democratic model is very specific,
because democracy, the power of the people, consists in the act of legitimating,
that is, power comes from the people, not from God or from the prince.
This is related to what Claude Lefort called the democratic revolution.
But this democratic principle cannot stand on its own,
it always comes from a certain geographical or cultural tradition,
and our democracy, which comes from the liberal tradition, I mean liberal in the sense of political liberalism, I'll come back to that,
some call it representative democracy, others call it modern democracy,
although I prefer using the expression of pluralist democracy,
anyway what matters is that our Western democracy articulates democracy on the one hand,
which is concerned with the sovereignty of the people and the idea of equality,
and the liberal tradition on the other hand,
in the sense of political liberalism once again, which is concerned with the rule of law,
the division of powers and the defence of individual liberty.
Our democracy articulates both these traditions.
There is a fantastic little book entitled "The Life and Times of Liberal Democracy"
by the Canadian philosopher C. B. Macpherson that shows very efficiently
how this articulation between the liberal and democratic traditions
began in the 19th century, when liberals and democrats fought against absolutism together.
I insist on the fact that the relation between liberalism and democracy is not necessary,
which is why some regimes are liberal without being democratic, and some regimes are democratic without being liberal.
This may shock us, but on an ethymological level, it is perfectly possible.
If we are shocked, it is precisely because our democracy articulated both theses traditions.
For a long time, theorists in political philosophy have discussed whether
democracy and liberalism were contradictory or not.
Habermas defended the idea that both concepts went hand in hand,
whereas Carl Schmitt claimed there was a fundamental contradiction between them
and that they are mutually exclusive.
I defend a different position in "The Democratic Paradox".
It is true that the democratic and liberal traditions cannot be reconciled,
if we understand them as equality and liberty.
There will never be such thing as complete equality or liberty,
but this should not be understood as a threat to pluralist democracy.
Rather, it should be seen as a paradoxical space, as I call it,
a space that is important because it enables pluralism.
But in order to understand today's situation,
we have to recognize that the tension between the two should be resolved through negociation.
I call the tension between the defence of liberty and the defence of equality an agonistic tension.
In political terms, we could sum it up as the much touted rightwing-left wing distinction.
But in the history of democracy, there is always a moment when democratic values prevail,
in other words equality,
or on the contrary, there is always a moment when liberty prevails.
But the tension between the two is always there and there is always the possibility of rebalancing the two.
I think all the history of democracy consists in
one of these values prevailing over or being subordinate to the other one.
Now, what has been going on for about thirty years is that this agonistic tension between equality and liberty,
between the liberal and egalitarian principles, disappeared.
This happened because we live in societies where the liberal tradition,
and I mean liberal in a quite restrictive sense, which of course has been modified by neoliberalism,
has become so predominant that when you speak of popular sovereignty,
people look at you like you come from another planet, they think this concept is anachronistic and outaded.
The same goes for equality, which is why many autors say, and I agree with them,
they say that the society we live in is a post-democracy, that it still pretends to be democratic,
but that democratic institutions function without a goal.
Why? Because the values of liberty and equality that are constituents of the democratic tradition have been set aside completely.
So we live in a society in which democracy is reduced to the organization of elections
or the defence of human rights, a peculiar defence by the way,
and that's what democracy is all about nowadays.
So we live in a post-democratic society, and I think we will analyze the reasons that led us to this situation,
but I think it is very important to understand that in the course of the last thirty years
our societies went through a deep transformation.
Some call this a process of "undemocratization" or a crisis of democracy
and I think that the predominance of the liberal tradition swept away the values
of the democratic tradition, equality and popular sovereignty.
Jean-Luc, what can you say about the issue of post-democracy?
JLM: Well, my method is quite different since I am involved in a political fight.
So... Whatever.
I tackled the issue in a more anthropological way.
What is the function of democracy? This was your question, wasn't it?
So, I usually think using different terms.
My analysis is that the quantity of human beings and its fluctuation
produces a beat in history, generates contradictions
that all humans have to deal with, to control...
Humanity is full of conflicts and it has to settle them.
Where do conflicts come from?
First, one phenomenon is more important than any other,
it is the fundamental contradiction of our societies, and it is a recent phenomenon.
This contradiction is between the quantity of human beings,
the predation of humanity on nature,
and the fact that this predation destroys the ecosystem that makes human life possible.
This contradiction is the driving force of the era that just began.
I will not answer the question the way Chantal did it.
Society's development is not caused by its ideas,
it is caused by the reality society is faced with.
Now I'll go back in history.
What is the function of democracy for society?
This function is not the result of inspiration or generosity. It is the result of a very specific problem.
Contrary to what one might think, the first political communities were not organized as a large-scale family.
In the first political communities, an authority ruled the population and the territories it lived on.
Thus began society. But in this case, who decides?
The critical question for every society is: Who decides? and, Is the decision legitimate?
And in the beginning, force is the only legitimacy. I decide because I am stronger than you.
The problem is that the use of force to impose the rule of law in a growing population is exhausting.
Therefore law is decided by consenting to the violence a higher principle.
Here our ideas are similar.
For instance God decided that things were as they were,
and the power of the king comes from God.
In Spain,  it was written "Fransisco Franco, Caudillo of Spain by the Grace of God" on peseta coins,
he could not legitimate his power by saying he had won the Civil War and slaughtered the Republicans.
The power needs to be legetimate.
Where does that legitimacy come from?
Some solutions were given, and then a major political event occurred in history, the great 1789 revolution.
The words 'right' and 'left' entered the political vocabulary because of one issue, the right of veto.
Does the king have the right to exercise his veto on the laws that are adopted?
The king stood up, and asked those who supported the right of veto to stand on his right,
and those who opposed to stand on his left.
Those who denied the existence of a right of veto
presupposed that only the people's collective deliberation was legitimate.
Or rather those who were speaking in the name of the people.
The rightwing-leftwing division began on this very day.
It is therefore closely related to the fundamental issue of sovereignty.
There cannot be a democracy without the determination of a principle of sovereignty.
Who decides what? What comes within the scope of my authority?
From my materialist point of view, democracy is therefore nothing but a way of deciding.
We decide according to democratic methods. 51% of the voters prevail over the remaining 49%.
This method is absurd if you think about it,
but it means that no higher reason or structure prevails over our decision.
None! Even what we call scientific thruths, since they are true only temporarily.
Nothing is superior to collective deliberation.
If we accept this idea, the people becomes a total category,
it decides of eveything, every subject, in every circumstance.
Of course this only occurs in specific situations, in some occasions,
but this idea underpins the history of democracy.
Therefore, republicans think about what is good for everyone,
and if we go to the bottom of this idea, if no one or nothing should prevail in society,
then this society has to be egalitarian,
for equality is the only guarantee of individual freedom.
And from this deduction, Chantal's categories can operate,
with what she said about the tension between the ideas of equality and liberty.
But for us materialists, these categories come about after we answered the question of how things happened.
How do things happen? They happen as I explained.
If you really wish society to be made of free individuals,
that is, a society that is not dominated by anyone, then this society has to be egalitarian.
This is the reason why sovereigty, emancipation and republic,
I mean republic in the sense of res publica, of public affairs,
go hand in hand in the people's self-construction process.
Here, Chantal argues that the political self-construction of the people is not always progressive,
and she is perfectly right, we will deal with this issue later.
But in our opinion... Sorry in my opinion, I don't want to speak on behalf of everyone,
the method that leads to popular hegemony is collective emancipation.
Everytime the people tries to shirk the consequences of its will of collective hegemony,
the people is led to absurdities like the creation of false conflicts
such as conflicts between muslims and non-muslims,
tall and short persons, blacks and whites,
that is, subcategories that are ultimately obstacles to the initial assertion,
that of the will of democratic hegemony.
This is the way I see things.
But what I really want to stress is that the driving forces of history
are not the ideas we have about history,
the driving forces of history are the contradictions and conflicts that exist within human societies.
Here I agree with what Chantal says in "On the Political",
democracy is not possible within consensus.
Conflicts are inherent to society, and democracy aims at resolving them.
As a consequence, dissensus and conflicts are the driving forces of democracy.
There is no cost other than recognising it.
We need to recognise the existence of a conflict in society if we want to solve it rationally,
meaning we can decide to solve it democratically and not through the use of force,
we can decide whatever we want,
we can decide to vote, to use diplomacy instead of war.
As long as we deny the existence of conflicts, we will be compelled to use totalitarian practices.
For some people, conflict is something horrible and absurd,
as a disturbance of the obvious organic unity of society.
For us materialists, struggle is the mother of everything, conflict is the mother of everything.
This leads me to two conclusions, and I'll stop with this topic.
First, conflicts have an educational dimension.
So when societies build cultural hegemonies that oppose our conception,
this has been the case for twenty years,
with the hegemony of competitiveness,
or this absurd idea of the equality of opportunity.
The equality of opportunity can be fully fulfilled only in activities like lottery, not in reasonable activities.
We are going to try to dynamite all these things.
For this, we need to strike the system's weak points
in order to create a conflict that forces everyone to think things through.
Educational conflicts are a political strategy that of course contain their own resolution.
Once the conflictual event has been provoked, we have to explain how to resolve it,
but before this, you need to have the courage to provoke the conflict.
As for the bourgeois, all he dreams of is to be given the legitimate power spontaneously,
he even does nothing but repeat what others told him.
The centrality of conflicts comes from the vision we have of societies that are necessarily driven by contradictions,
and contradictions do not come from any malicious intent,
they come from the fact that we are many,
and the more we are, the more the issues of the distribution of wealth
and of the right to wellbeing become sources of conflict,
since one part of society profits from the work of the other part.
Society can only be free when it really is egalitarian.
Sorry for this addition of tautologies, but it combines the old methods of democratic socialism
with populism... Tonight I confess that populism is the issue we are dealing with,
but if I took the risk of saying...
I once told Chantal that precisely because of the reasons she gives,
I will never admit being a populist,
because this word would provoke a conflict that would be a disservice to my ideas,
because I would be constantly dealing with semantics rather than politics.
I would be forced to explain that there is such and such type of populism.
The conflictual tactics... and this concerns me more than Chantal,
brings about specific ways of organizing politically, I call it movement,
in my case the movement of La France Insoumise.
The movement goes beyond the old method of the political party.
I'm attacking the opponent from where he cannot see the conflict coming.
I am not going to use the tools and mental categories of my opponent,
thereby preventing people from becoming aware of my ideas because of a word used to blacken my reputation.
They use the word 'populism' in order to smear the radical left.
What can we do about it?
(...)
CM: Jean-Luc, you keep on saying "As a materialist"
as if you were implying that I am not a materialist.
(...)
JLM: No, that's not what I implied. I said this because of the audience.
Here are my professors in Marxism, so I had better behave myself.
CM: I also consider myself a materialist.
I'm glad because although we tackle subjects differently, our conclusions are similar.
I think we have to emphasize the fact that to us,
democracy does not consist in reaching a total consensus,
but rather in organizing dissensus.
Marcel Mauss had a wonderful expression.
He said that democracy enabled people to have different opinions without slaughtering themselves.
This is a very important idea.
The expression of different opinion without a slaughter.
In my works, I insist on making a distinction between an enemy and an opponent.
It is not acceptable to see the relation between 'we' and 'they'
as a relation between friends and enemies in a democracy,
otherwise we would consider the opponent as someone to eliminate.
But democracy can be defined as an agonistic struggle.
It consists in admitting that antagonisms are part of society.
An antagonism is a conflict that cannot be resolved rationally,
but still players try to resolve it without slaughtering themselves,
meaning they recognise that others are legitimate in defending their point of view.
It is precisely this dimension that disappeared in post-democracy,
and I think we should restore this agonisitic dimension today.
Maybe we could move on to the third point
in order to analyze the reasons that led us to this situation.
CV: Exactly. It is clear that Jean-Luc and Chantal
were able to carefully examine this dimension in their intellectual journey,
and Jean-Luc even fought against it when he was a member of the Socialist Party.
For the last thirty years, we 've been witnessing that post-democracy made its way in Europe
and resulted in the connection or merger between social democracy and conservative parties.
Their conceptions standardized, and this political consensus has become the undebatable norm.
This was theorized by Tony Blair's third way for instance,
and this way of looking at politics in fact led to the decay of democracy and to the emergence of the worst political solutions
since Chantal considers that the connection between social democracy and conservatives
led to the considerable develoment of parties like the austrian FPO or the French Nationl Front.
So we will keep on discussing the issues of democracy and post-democracy
and we will wonder how we got here, how things happened,
and what are according to you the solutions to remedy this situation.
CM: I suggest that we deal with both issues separately.
There is a lot to say on how we got to this situation, and then we'll deal with solutions.
How did we get to this situation? To me the answer is very simple,
it is the consequence of the hegemony of neoliberalism.
Post-democracy has developed in the last thirty years ago,
on two different levels.
On a political level, there's a phenomenon that I call post-politics,
it is one of the main subjects of my book "On the Political",
and it is roughly the same as Tony Blair's third way.
It is at this period that things began,
you know, the idea that antagonisms were obsolete.
Tony Blair used to say that we are all part of the middle class, so we should all be able to come to an agreement.
This was said to be a major advance for democracy,
since democracy was now mature, antagonisms had disappeared,
political conflicts between right and left were over.
Tony Giddens, who inspired Blair, wrote a book entitled "Beyond Left and Right",
a title that sums up post-politics very well.
In more concrete terms, it was then that social democracy began describing itself as centre-left,
they were no longer the left, they were now the centre-left.
All things considered, the centre-left and the centre-right agreed
that there was no alternative to global neoliberalism.
I think this idea is at the heart of post-democracy.
This means that when social democrats come to power,
all they can do is handle the situation in a slightly more human and redistributive way.
Here I am speaking of Great-Britain more specifically.
When Blair came to power, he did not try to challenge the thatcherian hegemony  for a minute.
He merely chose to handle the situation in a slightly more positive way.
Here, we need to understand that
when citizens vote, they have no choice,
since there is no significant difference between the centre-left and the centre-right.
As Jean-Luc said, the idea of popular sovereignty is that citizens can decide,
and if political programmes are basically the same, you don't have the possibility to decide.
The Spanish Indignados had a wonderful formula,
they said "Tenemos voto, pero no tenemos voz",
which means that we have votes, but we don't have a voice.
This is obvious, if you can vote for programmes that are almost identical, then you don't have a voice.
This post-politics I talk about had the effect of
erasing what was central in the idea of democracy,
the idea that citizens have the possibility of making a choice when they vote.
So this was the political dimension.
On the economic level, the neoliberal hegemony also brought about very deep transformations.
I don't have time to go into details,
but I call 'oligarchization' the phenomenon that occured in our societies.
It means that inequalities increased exponentially because of the globalization of economy and finance.
Thomas Piketty's works are very clear on this point.
To me, this phenomenon is really specific to neoliberal policies.
A real abyss now divides the societies we live in,
with a tiny group that gets richer and richer on the one hand,
and of course the lower classes on the other hand,
but also the middle classes, who go through a process of pauperization and casualization.
This has important consequences that we will analyze later,
but it enables us to think about building the people in a different way.
Both these phenomena, post-politics on the one hand,
that is the impossibility for citizens to have a voice,
and oligarchization on the other hand,
are really the end of the idea of equality.
By the way, to go back to Grate-Britain...
Of course things are changing thanks to Jeremy Corbyn, thankfully,
but the Labour Party did not use the word 'equality', never.
They talked about 'choice', they wanted to allow voters to choose,
to choose their school, their doctor...
But the very idea of equality was considered a zombie category, speaking of equality did not make any sense anymore.
That's what post-democracy is all about,
because equality and popular soveignty are central elements for democracy,
and today, these values are precisely those that were abandoned
because of the domination of the idea of liberty in the neoliberal sense.
So...
I think we'll discuss this later,
but I think that these phenomena paved the way for the development of rightwing populism.
But more generally, I would say that today,
and maybe some will disagree,
we are currently in a populist moment.
What do I mean by this?
The populist moment is characterized by the need to rebalance the relation that I said was central for pluralist democracy,
the relation between liberty and equality.
It is important that a movement rebalances this relation,
reopens the possibility of the agonistic struggle between right and left,
puts an end to center-left and center-right,
and puts an end to this consensus that reduces politics to something only experts could deal with.
If we accept that there cannot be an alternative to neoliberal globalisation,
it means that political decisions concerning the organization of society are no longer possible.
All this is gone.
In this regard, political issues are reduced to technical issues,
issues that concern the organization of a situation that cannot be modified.
And if political issues are nothing but technical issues, then only experts can solve them.
Here once again, citizens are prevented from intervening in public affairs, from having a voice.
This is specific to our societies today, which is why I speak of post-democracy.
CV: Jean-Luc, do you agree with this analysis?
JLM: Well it depends on which aspects.
Well, we began by asking what our solutions were.
Chantal partly answered the question, I'll use it as a transition
So what happened?
In order to answer this question,
we have to get used to the idea that everything has a history, everything is part of a movement,
and every movement is triggered by an internal contradiction.
Capitalism is a word that defines several historic realities.
18th and 19th capitalism and today's capitalism are completely different models of accumulation,
although each phase contains former phases,
integrates the contradictions of the former phase,
and often makes things worse in trying to solve them.
By definition, capitalism is an unstable system.
Since it has begun, crises multiplied,
and in the recent decades, crises occur more and more often.
In the past, crises occurred every twenty years, then every ten years,
and now we are in an age where crises occur roughly every five years,
and these are systemic crises due to the very model of accumulation.
The last crisis that occurred was that of 2008,
and the next to come will occur very soon, no one knows where it will begin,
but it will occur, there is no doubt about this.
The basic contradiction of capitalism is that it is a system of overproduction.
It keeps producing more and more for an ever-shrinking number of consumers that can absorb its productions.
I'm leaving aside the environmental issue, and the question of what and how to produce things,
but let us start from the basic contradiction of capitalism.
At each step of its develoment, capitalism aggravated the causes that were at the start of the crisis in trying to solve them.
WWI was already a crisis of overproduction and of markets' conquest,
between different sectors of capitalism.
At the outcome of this crisis, part of the global economy was out of reach for capitalism,
Russia and the rest, and after WWII, the capitalist market kept shrinking,
because more than a third of humanity lived under a regime where capitalist accumulation was not possible.
There was something else, but no capitalist accumulation.
The shrinking of the market led capitalism to a virtual economy, to virtual accumulation,
and we know when it started.
On the 15th of August 1971, the US president decided that the dollar, that was used to measure all the currencies,
no longer needed a material equivalent (gold), whereas currency is nothing but an equivalent between two material values.
Since then, the USA... You see that there is a correspondence between power and sign.
Well the USA began to print an incredible quantity of money that no one had never seen before.
Billions and billions and billions of dollars were put into circulation
without any material equivalent in North-American economy!
This worked for two reasons: firstly, every country uses this currency for trade.
Secondly, because every country had better keep this currency in their safe,
because it is protected by the first army in the world, the US army,
who has the power to defend the value of its currency, or so they think.
This is the fundamental phenomenon that explains what happens next.
This extreme accumulation enabled the emergence of an oligarchy made of very few people.
Here we agree on the emergence of this category,
which is a tiny group that possesses nearly everything,
a tiny group of financial companies that possesses all the companies in the real economy.
Financial capitalism then submits all the subdivisions of capitalism
and all human activities to the norm. of financial accumulation,
thereby turning everything into commodities, signs and equivalents.
This is what you call 'oligarchization', which is a historical process that has a consequence,
something that is very important for us political activists,
something Smouts and Badie called the  reversal of the world.
In the past, human society was inter-national.
Nations were created after the French Revolution of 1789,
and world order was determined through a contractual relation between nations.
Financial capitalism turns the world upside down.
This means that nations become the peoples' prisons while it is free to go wherever it wants, and opposes nations against one another
Therefore the reversal of democracy comes from the oligarchization process.
It is so, not only because oligarchs want it, I'll come back to that,
but because of the mechanism that produces oligarchs itself,
a mechanism that produces this huge financial bubble
that represents 4000 times the goods that are exchanged in the world each day!
These are astronomic proportions!
The banking system contains a huge number of signs without an equivalent,
and that's just the visible part that goes through banks.
You know that rules have been imposed on banks for them to take less risks.
There is also shadowbanking. Mr Juppé doesn't know what it is,
and it's a shame since it is the equivalent of a year of GDP for the all world. But he doesn't know shadowbanking...
This shows that oligarchs and their cast are not always well informed.
So, that's the way things are,
with at least two consequences.
A marxist would say that the ideas of the ruling class are the ruling ideas.
So the ruling class imposes its ideas as if they were obvious, natural,
as if they were laws of nature, period!
You may constantly find examples of this, let's say "totalitarian" desire to impose a way of looking at things.
As Mrs. Thatcher said, there is no alternative.
In a recently published handbook, some economists introduced what they considered the laws of economics,
and claimed that those who disagreed were crazy negationists,
because they refused to accept what they considered the truth.
Imposing one's ideas as natural is one of the methods for dominating society.
We as real democrats think that there is no higher truth that should rule society.
None! Only contradictions make society move.
So we have the imposed dominant ideas that make the political framework,
but there's something new.
Consent to authority is being taught in everyday life.
Our world is a globalitarian world, it has no limits.
In this world, it is impossible to think and act using other ideas than the ruling ideas of the ruling class.
These values are injected into our brains through everything we eat, use or drink.
The way we think looks like instructions for use.
Our way of life is entirely structured by commodities whose characteristics are specific.
They are perishable, disposable.
We need to constantly change them, they are always out of fashion,
and so on, I will not go into details, but they are dipped in values.
There is also a political strategy,
a strategy that consists in setting up political frameworks in which economy is not a political issue,
because it obeys the laws of nature, and we call this ordoliberalism.
The system tried this strategy in Africa,
where structural adjustment programmes were implemented for the first time.
These policies were then applied to Latin America, under the supervision of the IMF.
They destroyed Latin American societies.
Then they have been applied to Europe, in their most complete form: European treatises,
the 2005 constitutional treaty, the budgetary treaty and so on.
These are not economic treaties. These are political treaties.
They assert that financial capitalism prevails over all the aspects of life.
These treaties aim at eliminating democracy forever.
They succeeded in eliminating it, in containing it, but it must never come back!
How did they do that? First, by stealing words. They stole all the the words we used
in order to prevent us from thinking, this is an orwellian strategy.
A rightwing policy is called a leftwing policy,
war is peace, ans so on and so on.
I will not go into details. You understand that they stole the words we used,
the symbols, the tools and the symbolic representations we used,
in order to prevent us from thinking with our mental categories.
I agree with Chantal when she says we are in a populist moment.
This system is a theft of popular sovereignty.
Earlier in the debate, I said that sovereignty was the basic principle of society.
The ruler does not matter because it is sovereignty that enables social cohesion.
Because of the reversal of the world, the sovereignty of nations and peoples does not exist anymore.
There is nothing but the sovereignty of capital.
And nowadays, we witness a chemically pure manifestation of the desire to formalise this domination
with the TAFTA, the CETA, the TISA,
i.e. treaties that constitutionalize the fact that multinationals no longer obey any law.
We have the right to adopt any law, provided that they do not frustrate the investments of financial capital.
But multinationals no longer obey any law, on the ground that thay are trans-national.
No law has authority on them, besides their own authority,
in other words arbritration tribunals whose function is to settle the disputes between the rich and powerful
because they have not managed to avoid disputes between them yet.
They are subjected to the same old demons than the rest of society: contradictions and conflicts.
Capitalism is a deadly regime, it kills both the exploited and the exploiters. Everyone is constantly on the hot seat.
Even sharks do not kill their congeners as much as capitalists.
There is an old formula by Marx that says that capitalists mutually expropriate their property.
This is how the mecanism was set.
But how do social democrat parties...
I take this example because in most cases since the fall of the Berlin Wall and the end of USSR,
the social democrat party has been the only progressive party at the head of a government.
They call themselves 'government left', which always makes me laugh,
because they are not able to govern anyone, not even the police.
Anyway. Where does social democracy come from?
It is an outdated software.
Before we speak of hardliners and traitors...
You know, these clowns who understand and wallow in the situation like opportunists,
guys like Blair or Schröder, who are literally corrupted,
in the sense that they enthusiastically subscribe to a system but pretend they are fighting it.
Blair, Schröder, Papandreou, Zapatero and so on.
In France, which is a particular case because social democracy never existed in this country,
and if it did, it was embodied by the Communist Party,
because it was the great working-class party that negotiated social benefits with the help of a union.
This model is the model of all Northern Europe, and it disappeared.
Social democracy only functions when a union or a political party
negotiates benefits for workers with employers.
But when employers are submitted to transnational capital, social democracy cannot function. Why?
For instance, when you are a union activist in Denmark
and that your union signs an agreement with your employer, who's also a member of an employers' union,
you benefit from the agreement, that's not the way it happens in France.
In France, you benefit from the agreement whether you are a member of a union or not,
but not in Denmark, you need to be a member of a union.
Imagine what happens when the employer is not an old-style employer.
In Germany, employers are no longer old-style employers who know the local bank.
Schröder cut the link between banks and companies, by allowing banks to sell a company's actions without being overtaxed, as used to be the case.
This is a concrete measure!
You are now facing people who will not sign company agreements
because they work for hedge funds that do not want to lose money.
So they don't sign and that's it!
Although 90% of danish workers used to be under the protection of collective agreements,
only 20% of them are now protected by such agreements.
Therefore, social democracy collapsed, because its fondation collapsed.
Its fondation enblabled him to organize an antagonistic relation with employers,
but it slipped through its fingers since financial capital has become transnational
and since hedge funds and finance rule economy. That's what happened.
This is the reason why social democrats behave like that.
Since they don't know what to do anymore, they keep on doing what they've always done.
They think that  workers will pick up the crumbs of capitalism as long as it functions,
but it's over now, capitalism won't let workers pick up the crumbs as it is now completely predaceous.
CM: I agree, but it seems to me that...
The way you present the responsability of socal-democrats in this situation
gives the impression that they did not have a choice,
but I think they were in collusion with neoliberalism.
It's not just that they lost their fondation, they were completely involved in this process.
For instance, what to me was decisive was that...
When I wrote "On the Political"... Christophe said it was my most recent book.
It is my most recent book in French, because it was published ten years ago in Great-Britain.
In 2005, I still thought that maybe social democrat parties could become leftwing parties again,
but I became completely disillusioned with the way they behaved during the 2008 financial crisis.
If they had... 'If', 'if', that would have meant that they were different parties...
Anyway, until 2008, the intervention of the state was considered an abomination,
and all of a sudden, the state was called for help.
Social democrats might have done what Franklin D. Roosevelt did in the thirties...
Of course social movements played a part in this, he did not decide to do this on his own.
Powerful social movements drove him to adopt redistibutive policies through the intervention of the state.
As for social democrat parties in Europe, they did not even try to do that.
They did accept the intervention of the state, but in order to save the banks!
In this regard, I am much more severe than you are as to their responsibility in this situation.
They really had a chance to take advantage of the situation,
but they chose to save the banks,
and then they accepted all the austerity measures that had been implemented by the right.
It was then that I figured out that they would never become leftwing parties again,
because their involvement in neoliberalism had gone too far.
In fact, in many countries, austerity measures and privatization policies have been implemented by social democrats.
They were more involved in this process than you said they were,
because you said they were facing economic conditions that forced them to behave like this,
but they took an active part in this process.
JLM: My conclusion is the same as yours, but...
Maybe you are less aware of the reality of leftwing parties...
To me, the left is often intellectually lazy.
Leftists use to say things happened this way because such and such person is a traitor.
OK, so let us kill traitors and let socialism begin! Of course it doesn't happen this way!
I'm interested in understanding why intelligent, reasonable people end up taking such decisions.
I was a member of the Socialist Party for thirty years,
and I could see from within how an organization that nationalized all the banks in my country
ended up doing exactly the opposite a few decades later.
In 1981 all the banks were nationalized, but you know today's situation and who's reponsible for it.
I agree with you, but I'm interested in how it happened,
and why some people felt free to do so.
As time goes by, political parties, like any human organization, select their leaders,
we know their selection mechanisms,
and if you think that they are selected through the prestigious schools and universities
you are greatly mistaken.
Rather, the party silences dissenters
then it selects an elite by means that are sometimes very brutal.
For instance how did François Hollande win the Socialist Party's primary election, he who had been the lowest in the polls before the vote?
The leader was Dominique Strauss-Kahn, the second was Martine Aubry, and Hollande was the lowest candidate  with 3%,
then Mr Strauss-Kahn went through the misadventures you heard of,
and then the week before the vote, the lowest candidate was higher in the polls than Mrs Aubry who had been second.
Thanks to opinion polls, he was really lucky! Opinion polls tell everyone who is supposed to win.
But there are more sophisticated methods of selection.
The Young Leaders program for instance, that is supervised by the USA in order to spot the new generation of leaders.
So you are a young politician, and when you are elected, you are invited to visit the USA,
you can do whatever you want there, but then you make friends, contacts...
Young Leaders, remember this!
So there are dozens of mechanisms that I call corruption mechanisms,
but not in the sense of bribing people, although it does happen sometimes, people are bought, paid,
but it doesn't happen in the back of a room with a suitcase in hand,
people are rather kindly asked to give a conference, things like that.
For instance, how did some people try to bribe me? Of course they tried!
Some people told me: "Mr Mélenchon, we are very interested in what you say about the decolonization of New Caledonia,
we would like to help kanak tribes to assert their culture,
but we do not know to whom we should give the money. Would you take care of that?"
I have many defaults, like patriotism, so I began by saying the opposite of what I thought,
I said: "What? What decolonization? France does not have any colonies!", of course it does,
but I could not tell this man why I refused his money.
Refusing their money is a dangerous thing to do.
I said: "I don't know, they don't need anything."
And then I added: "Oh, I know, of course!
In Australia, Aborigines are very unhappy, I can give them your money if you want!"
The guy understood I was making fun of him and the story ended,
but I saw how they bribe people and how people are introduced to circles with my own eyes.
"Don't you want to give a conference?"  I saw that a hundred times!
So you arrive on Wednesday, and you are told "The conference is on Thursday! You may stay until Sunday if you want, we'll take care of everything!"
That's how it happens! Thus, a sort of... what you said about oligarchy...
The oligarchy could not make it without the help of what I call the caste.
The caste is made of a political personnel that is hired with the methods I described,
and of a mediacracy no one ever speaks of, which is the system's second skin.
Its function is to constantly stage what is obvious, and to tell people who's good and who's bad,
and above all, it uses the most important method, invisibilization.
In other words, the ideological opponent must disappear.
For instance in the USA,  Bernie Sanders was erased from the scene,
and in Europe too, with the help of zealous journalists, who said Clinton had won before the primary election was over,
this was in the newspaper "Liberation", if you consider it is a newspaper,
but no! Clinton had not won yet!
Bernie Sanders was close to win the primary election, but he had been invisibilized.
And when a politician is not invisibilized, he/she is given a political personality that does not correspond to reality,
but that forces the politician to defend himself or herself.
I know what I'm talking about, I am called a poutinian! So I constantly have to explain I have nothing to do with Poutine.
So journalists say "You see, there's a problem with Poutine, since you need to say  you have nothing to do with him!"
This is the way they invisibilize and demonize political opponents.
Therefore, as time and generations go by for social democrats,
union and political activists turn into battery-farmed chicken,
animals that not once in their life tried to look for food,
they are always battery-fed.
I say 'battery-farmed chicken' in order to show that they are completely tamed,
and it must be said that they are intelligent, cultured, they don't think they are traitors.
They don't wake up in the morning wondering "How will I betray the working class today?",
They think they profess the truth, that things have to go the way they go,
"and this Mr Mélenchon is crazy, besides he talks with Mrs Mouffe, whose ideas are dubious by the way",
and so on, to them, we are all crazy and lunatics.
CM: Jean-Luc, I think it is time for us to move on to the second part. (...)
CV: You should speak in the mic.
CM: So how did we get to this situation, what are our solutions?
CV: ...to get out of this situation. CM: To fight post-democrcay.
So I'm glad that you agree on the fact that we are in a populist moment.
By this I mean the need to rebalance the situation, to give a voice back to the people.
Now we are going to deal with a topic on which we might disagree, and some of you here might no like what I'm about to say.
I think if we want to know how to fight post-democracy... We were speaking of a populist moment,
but unfortunately, this moment has until now been that of the right.
But why should the right necessarily prevail in this moment?
When I speak of a populist moment, I speak of the need to fight post-politics and oligarchization,
and to do so, we need a popular movement.
Unfortunately, except for rare exceptions, the right has gained a lot of ground on the left.
And now comes the time when some of you might disagree.
I think the best way to prevent the right from being successful in this process,
or to nip it in the bud where it is not successful yet
we need to understand that the demands that underpin these... let's say perverted movements, are really concerned with democracy.
These movements are literally reactions against post-politics and post-democracy.
Rightwing populism comes from the fact that no progressive alternative answered these democratic demands.
It is obvious that... and this is the case in France and other countries,
that entire sectors of the lower classes were abandoned by social democrats, which is why I insist on their responsibility.
These sectors are usually those who did not benefit from globalization ,
workers who lost their jobs or that are afraid of losing it,
and all those who do not correspond to the idea of happy globalization.
And since social democrat parties, who are supposed to defend the lower classes,
don't want to hear what they are saying, because it goes against the idea that there is no alternative.
As a Belgian it's hard for me to talk about the French situation,
but it is clear that Marine Le Pen's success comes from the fact that she offers an alternative
to those who were abandoned by the Socialist Party,
she says she speaks on their behalf.
She answers these demands in a way... You were refering to that,
she gives an ethnic response to social issues.
And for workers that lost their jobs or that are afraid of losing it, to whom the Socialist Party gives no response,
saying that immigrants are the problem is efficient
if no one tells them multinationals are the cause of their problems instead of immigrants.
In a way, without a progressive alternative, theses classes are doomed to support the National Front.
To me, the worst response, and I think this method is criminal,
is to say: "Oh, these workers are racists and retarded, they don't understand globalization!",
this sort of moral condemnation is criminal,
and this happens everywhere, not just in France.
When rightwing populism emerges, social democrats have nothing to say but "Fascists are back! The far right is back!".
To me, the far right category is not pertinent, it prevents us from analyzing what's wrong.
We need to understand what is appealing in these rightwing populist parties.
This is the only way that could enable us to speak to these categories,
and to offer them another discourse, a progressive alternative that responds to their demands.
We cannot just call them racists and retarded.
To me the only way to fight rightwing populism is to develop a leftwing populism,
that is, understanding and politicizing their distress in a progressive way,
organizing their anger in a progressive way.
I am refering to three themes that come from the strategy of Podemos:
"Politizar el dolor, organizar la rabia y politizar el deseo",
which means "Politicizing suffering, organizing anger and politicizing desire".
And there's another point that we agree on, we talked about this in Buenos Aires,
what matters for offering an alternative is to understand the importance of affects in politics.
This is something that leftwing parties do not understand!
Leftwing parties are completely rationalist, they think that affects are the business of the right.
They think they have to provide people with statistics and arguments.
For instance, when I attended meetings concerning the issue of refugees,
it was said that people did not know the statistics, that there was not as many refugees as they thought,  that they didn't know the situation.
It was also said that in order to fight racism, we had to explain that science proved that races did not exist,
so how could people be racists if races did not exist.
Don't laugh, this is a very common argument of leftwing parties, they think they have to give arguments.
They think that everything that concerns affects is not of their business,
and the consequence of this is that affects are only used by rightwing populist parties.
They know how to use affects, they know how to build a people.
In order to build a 'we', we have to crystalize common affects.
It is impossible to build a 'we' with statistics.
In order to build a 'we', we need to mobilize passions.
Passions are what I mean when I speak of common affects.
It is something that drives people to create a collective identity.
This is essential for the creation of a new 'we',
and we need to admit that rightwing populist parties succeeded in building a people, a 'we',
but a 'we' that is unacceptable to us progressives,
their 'we' in fact shrinks democracy, it does not make it stronger.
This is a major difference between rightwing and leftwing populisms.
We want to bring democracy back to life
but in order to enhance it and make it stronger, not to shrink it.
Another major difference concerns equality.
As I said, the basic principles of democracy are equality and popular sovereignty,
and rightwing populist parties do offer a vision of popular sovereignty,
and this explains their success, because they give people the possibility to express themselves.
The major difference concerns equality, they want to bring popular sovereignty back to life for instance,
but only for national citizens.
One of the major challenges for leftwing populism is to give a voice back to the people,
to give popular sovereignty back to the people, along with an egaliarian dimension.
And I'll finish with an aspect that is essential to me,
this can be done only through the mobilization of passions,
we need to mobilize passions towards progressive aims,
towards values like social justice or equality.
You know, passions are elastic,
they can be directed towards goals like the shrinking of democracy
but also the enhancing of democracy.
Leftwing populism should aim at building another people,
a people that opposes the forces of neoliberal globalization, not immigrants.
This is why I think this populist movement
needs to give another response to the issue of having a voice on our society.
CV: Jean-Luc, did the National Front succeed in building a people?
JLM: I'm getting lost...
I would say that no, they did not, but also yes, they did.
Because they succeeded in creating a voters' basis but...
In order to answer the question, let me flesh out my ideas, because you do not tackle the subject the way I do it.
I don't think there is any misunderstanding when people vote for the National Front.
There is an interesting idea: people want to have control over their lives,
but they fail to identify the reasons that explain this situation
There is a common root... You speak of a populist moment, I speak of a citizens' revoltion, I'll come back to that
I'll give my own answer.
I am a political activist among other political activists, some of whom are here tonight.
Our first task is to have a clear idea of the situation
because if we want to offer a new intellectual and affective construction, we need to know what our own ideas are.
If we think that all we need to do is to recite what we have always said like automatons,
and that saying The Truth would be sufficient to smash the wall we are facing, we are mistaken.
Therefore, we need to understand what changed and what the driving forces of history are.
Why did capitalism become as it is now? What is the people?
Where does it com from? Why does the theory of the citizens' revolution is the answer to contemporary issues?
Why are we facing a major environmental catastrophe that will ask the question of solving problems together our on one's own?
This will lead us back to the basic issue of political lateralization.
We can observe that the old political lateralizatioin is a failure and prevents us from thinking.
Everyone here knows what the left and the right are, but it's not the case for the average person.
Normal people think that Mr Hollande is the left, the media keep repeating this by the way.
So how can we think about a lateralization model if the left is described as something that has nothing to do with it.
We are confronted with this ostacle that prevents us from thinking.
But our ideas, our theory, our way of thinking must be clear.
I agree with Chantal Mouffe when she says that we should create affects to present to people,
but then we cannot make three steps backwards, like "This is horrible! What the hell are you saying?
These are passions, no one can have a grip on them! We are on the side of reason!" and so on.
In this I completely agree with Ernesto Laclau and Chantal Mouffe,
The people understood as a political category is a self-construction.
What are the elements of a process of self-construction?
Ideas, affects and objectives.
Our objective is the political programme.
Affects are the aesthetization of our values.
I tried to do that in our meetings,
by reading poems, poems by Victor Hugo, there's music,
and all this has to do with our ideas, we aestheticize what we consider the values of the left,
i.e. love, tenderness, fraternity, sharing, thoughtfulness for the weakest,
yearning for equality, not as an abstract notion, but as an empirical reality.
And the third issue is the issue ofthe people's  identity.
Mrs Le Pen's says the people is white and Catholic.
CM: Yes, she builds a people...
I agree, I'll come to that. CM: This is important.
JLM: Yeah, yeah, it's important, but she's going to lose the battle anyway!
OK, but let me answer the question.
I'm not an observer, I'm a player.
I'm not supposed to explain what Mrs Le Pen is, otherwise what's the point of organizing meetings?
We have to build a people. She affirms that you are white and Christians,
I affirm that you are the children of the Enlightenment.
It did not work, so I decided to create conflictuality.
I said Robespierre embodied the Enlightenment and everyone protested.
At that point everyone thought about this issue. "Why does he talk about Robespierre and the Great Revolution?"
And we could see that the fundamental hegemony of the French people had been  deconstructed,
that is, the idea that the French people was born with the 1789 revolution,
when privileges were abolished, when equality was set,
although that's not true since women could not vote,
but anyway, the revolutionary principle of equality was asserted and became the collective identity of the French people.
All this was erased through all sorts of cultural manifestations,
staging the king, the queen, their friends and so on...
and the revolution was depicted as the horrible work of savage barbarians.
Therefore, this cultural reconstruction is one of our objectives.
If you hear me talking about the Great Revolution so much,
it's not because it is a personal obsession,
it's because it is one of the major components that enable us to build a 'we',
or you get Mrs Le Pen's cultural construction.
I totally agree with you, only awareness matters,
and awareness as a purely rational phenomenon does not exist.
Awareness is a mix of reason and affects,
therefore a battle that dismisses affects is not a real battle.
It is a deserted battlefield, in which we consider humans as rational creatures,
but reason does not exist without culture, music, poetry, love and collective signifiers.
Therefore we need heroes, we need to have a common history.
Debating is a tricky thing... Maybe you heard of this story.
I tried to integrate the 1798 Revolution into the public debate by every possible means,
and all of a sudden, Nicolas Sarkozy said our ancestors were the Gauls. What an opportunity!
I said this was an ethnic conception of France,
but I have another conception to offer, that of the 1789 Revolution.
How did the media sumarize what I said? Not what I said about the Revolution, certainly not!
Our ancestors are the sans-culottes, do you think they would use that as a headline?
Headlines said "Mélenchon Says Sarkozy Was Right About the Gauls" so I became his accomplice.
And then our own friends cut our hands right when we had a grip on somethig that could make people think
and create conflictuality about two conceptions of French history.
History is science, and politics has nothing to do with science,
and historians have rights as scientists.
But we politicians must offer a collective history.
And some leftwing opponents told me that no, their collective history was the Paris Commune,
which means that they did have a collective history.
That's precisely what Chantal said, if we cannot identify ourselves with collective myths,
we cannot build ourselves as individuals.
We do it within our family, "my grandfather did this, my grandmother did  that"
so there is a collective history, anf making it our own history is important, in France particularly
since it was here that the 1789 Revolution occurred.
Now I'll talk about the dynamics of ideas, that is of the utmost importance.
We already gave what you said much thought.
But since what matters is awareness, then let us talk about  workers who vote for the National Front,
but let us do this seriously!
That is, we have to analyze election results in each polling station.
What conclusions can we draw from this analysis?
In their vast majority, workers do not vote.
60 to 70% of them do not vote
because they think the political scene is all a scam.
As far as those who vote are concerned, they have a collective history too.
When we were at the height of our fame during the 1981 Common Programme,
80% of workers voted, 70% of which voted for us,
which means that 30% of them were stupid enough not to vote for us.
All thier friends voted for the Common Programme back then.
So what were they rooted in? Not in their social class since they worked in the same factories as the rest,
they were rooted in what Chantal described, a specific people,
that is, the anti-Communist, Catholic, reactionary people.
They shared a collective identity, and they did not dissapear since their leaders are in the public sphere
saying "You see? We were right!"
Therefore they benefited from the dynamics, they got the vote of those who hesitated,
because they are the important issue
They got the vote of those who do vote, and of course it looks like they are plenty and innumerable.
Our task is to deconstruct the ideas they believein and also to mobilize those who do not vote.
We need to convince those who do not want to vote anymore,
those who refuse to take part in the political procaess.
They do not vote, which means that they are no longer politicizedco,
and the strategic, revolutionary answer to the question of what to do is to bring the people back to life.
The populist moment that Chantal described consists in building the people as a body politic.
How shall we do that? There is one central, strategic argument
that we can state based on the social aspirations that we described,
it is the constituant assembly.
The process of the constituant assembly enables the people to define itself politically.
What rights do we think we should have? That's what a constitution is all about.
This is the conclusion we may draw from the Chavez and Correa experiences in Latin America,
and we know their limit: they were unable to go on building the people.
That is, once millions of people were no longer in extreme poverty
and now belong to the middle class, but that no cultural revolution occurred,
and that no environmental objectives were set, then they behave like average middle class people,
meaning they define themselves through ostentatious consumption.
Therefore their consumeristic demands destroyed the revolution from within,
because the point of the revolution was not to enable people to buy SUVs and go through plastic surgery!
We agree on this point.
We have a good political programme, but we need to make a global reconstruction
of the values and affects that go with it, of the words we use to names things,
and besides, we need to take the responsibility for leadership.
Those who say that the 'we' is more democratic than the 'I' are irresponsible.
When you speak on behalf of yourself, people know what to expect,
whereas if you speak on behalf of 'we', who's 'we' then? I am speaking of leaders here, not of the construction of a 'we'.
Creating a collective 'we' is possible only on the condition that we set the stage properly.
Leaders should not hide themselves behind a mask and say 'we' instead of 'I'.
Some leaders feel they have to look depressed al the time,
and then they speak on behalf of 'we', but no one knows who 'we' is, The Party, the masses maybe...
Anyway. This is necessary. Everytime a populist revolution occured it was embodied by a leader.
You can't reproach people for needing a leader and call them stupid.
It is precisely because they are not stupid that they need a leader, male or female,
as was the case in Argentina with Christina Kirchner,
or in Brazil with Dilma Rousseff.
We have to put forth all these elements in our strategy,
and as far as the people is concerned, we have to think about embodying the body politic.
How shall we proceed? The class party was as the class it represented, it had limits.
The party of the people is by definition a limitless movement.
It's not an easy thing to build, but we are trying to do it.
It is a movement, it corresponds to modernity, and modernity means that the more we are, the more unique people are.
People won't stand in rows as they used to do in the past.
Therefore, they will decide to get involved on their own, as much as they want and whenever they want.
You might not like this method and consider it is individualistic,
but that's the way it is, people will join the collective 'we' on condition that they are and feel free.
If we don't understand this, we'll have to force people, but this won't work.
This is my way of agreeing with Chantal.
What matters to us is to have theorists that enable us to understand the situation.
We cannot act, think and theorize at the same time,
although I try to, as I'm an old-style political activist,
and to me theory entails practice.
What we are building in this political campaign is not an election, I mean yes there is the election of course,
but not only, we are trying to build a people, that's what we are trying to do,
and what is at stake is whether we built a people or not at the end of the campaign.
And you can see that those who try to stop us are our opponents, who try to misrepresent us,
but even our friends try to stop us, because they can't stand that their authority be challenged by the emergence of normal people.
To conclude, how does a citizens' revolution happen?
There has to be material conditions, society must be unable to respond to people's basic aspirations,
among which ecology, for instance we don't want our kids to eat poison, well that's difficult nowadays.
Anyway, society does not respond to people's basic aspirations,
and my third point is that institutions are unable to organize conflicts and debates,
and when the whole system is blocked, it goes off after minor incidents,
which means no one can tell when it will go off.
A guy committed suicide in Tunisia because he did not want to pay taxes on the vegetables he sold on the street,
and it caused a revolution.
In Venezuela, people accepted all the austerity measures, except one, the increase in the price of bus tickets.
And here we are dealing with something Chantal talked about that is fundamental,
it is the role of the "middle classes", i.e. those who became middle classes when the revolution began.
Why? Because they thought their social status improved because of their own personal efforts, they did not care about social issues,
and all of a sudden, their personal ambition and merit was hindered by a bureaucracy that did not take them into account.
At that point they began to get involved in the revolution,
like in Argentina, with the "caceroladas", that began with a problem about savings banks,
in Venezuela, the revolution began because of the price of bus tickets,
I don't remember what caused the revolution in Ecuador, but every time it is because of a minor incident.
In France, it could have been because of the death of Rémi Fraisse,
a young man who died during a demonstration against the building of a dam,
or it could be because of the police demonstrations, and this is what Chantal was talking about,
a movement is ambiguous at the beginning,
It's impossible to know whether police demonstrations are leftwing or rightwing demonstrations,
of course, members of the National Front are involved in these demonstrations, but their demands are for the most part democratic demands.
The situation is very complicated, and a revolution can begin because of this sort of event.
You don't see policemen demonstrating in front of the President's residence everyday!
The whole country saw that it was possible to get an appointment with the President after a demonstration in front of the Elysée!
So tomorrow, butchers... everybody will do the same!
Authority disappeared. No society can function without the consent to authority.
This is a clue that the minor incident that can cause a revolution is getting nearer.
I call this incident, this moment, the "May they all go to hell moment",
meaning one day, people are furious and they say "get the hell off, all of you!",
"all of you!", and this includes union activists, don't think that lefties are spared.
In Argentina, people also blamed union activists.
"It's your fault, enough with you, get the hell off!" Everybody!
Society collapses, and then it rebuilds itself politically.
CV: Thank you, we are behind schedule, but it's normal.
I think we have extra-time to go further.
So we discussed our fifth topic, the issue of the right-left split.
It's true that populists are often criticized for erasing the right-left split,
but it is often so because critics misunderstood their approach.
We have a bit of time to go on on this subject... CM: No we don't. What time is it?
CV: We have half an hour. Ok, twenty or fifteen minutes.
CM: Yeah but.. CV: We have about half an hour... You don't want to go, right? We have twenty minutes.
CM: Ok then. But let us try to be concise.
So the right-left split is a very important issue.
My opinion on this subject is that it depends on how we define right and left.
I think that in building a populist movement, we should...
I mean I build on the works of Ernesto Laclau who said in "On Populist Reason"
that populism was the setting down of a political division opposing the bottom to the top.
This is why I insist on the fact that we cannot develop a reflection about  populism
if we understand politics as an associative project.
This does not work with populism.
Populism is a division between 'we' and 'they', it does not tolerate an associative conception of politics.
This political reflection that we are developing comes from a theoratical reflection
that Ernesto and I developed in "Hegemony and Socialist Strategy".
So populism is the construction of a political division.
This political division can be set down in different ways.
For instance, Marxism sets down a division between bourgeoisie and proletariat.
This is not the populist division.
Maybe Jean-Luc will disagree, but that's the way I see it.
It is not possible to set down a populist political division on the basis of the right-left split,
because it traditionally refers to sociological categories whose specific interests are already defined,
meaning their place within the relations of production determines their ideas. Of course this is very clear in Marxism.
There is also a social democrat division that thinks the left represents the interests of lower classes against the top of the pyramid.
In a way, these are readymade divisions.
The interests of such and such category are represented by the right or the left.
This is the traditional split.
This is not the way a populist movement sets down a division.
I think building a people is not the same as building a class.
The populist division is necessary more transversal.
In "Hegemony and Socialist Strategy", we said that the division is the setting down of a chain of equivalences
between very heterogenous demands that come from very different  places.
These demands are crystallized in a 'we',
and I agree with Jean-Luc, we need a leader to do so,
maybe we'll discuss this later at the end.
Anyway, the setting down of a populist division does not use the traditional right-left split.
This division brings together very heterogenous demands,
but it doesn't mean that we should discard the right-left split or that it is no longer relevant.
It is relevant on another level that I described earlier,
when it enables us to make a distinction between rightwing and leftwing populism.
I talk a lot about this with members of Podemos,
and they say the right and the left are not universal categories, they are specific to our societies.
And that's true. For instance, in Latin America, national-populist movements  do not usually identify with the left.
In Argentina for instance, Kirchnerism did not identify with the left.
There was what was refered to as 'la izquierda cipaya',
that is, the left that wanted to establish a model inspired by Europe.
There's always been a rivalry between this left and Kirchner's national-populism.
I often told my friends there that to me, they were the left.
I think the situation of Correa's Ecuador is similar,
but these categories are not adapted to Latin America.
But we in Europe,
we cannot do without the right-left split,
because it is still symbolically important.
The left is still linked to the ideas of equality  and social justice,
and the right is still linked to the idea of liberty.
There's a wonderful book by Norberto Bobbio in which he wonders what is the meaning of the right and the left.
We've always linked certain values to the left,
like the enhancement of democracy or social justice.
I insist on the fact that I support the idea of a leftwing populism,
a populism that aims at radicalizing democracy,
but there are other forms of populism.
I think Marine Le Pen is a populist, she builds a people and gives it a voice,
but she does not defend the democratic values of equality and liberty.
So it's important to understand that the division cannot be set down on the traditional right-left split.
The left is like a sociological basis that can be represented by different people.
This comes from the development of financial capitalism that,
along with many negative consequences of course,
enables many different categories of people to identify with what Jean-Luc calls a citizens' project
or what I call a leftwing populism,
because contrary to the Fordist age, in which workers in assembly line jobs
were the only ones who felt capitalist domination,
well today, we all feel capitalist domination one way or another,
even those who have nothing to do with companies,
because we all feel the effects of privatization policies, for instance.
So today there is the possibility of rallying different categories around values of emancipation and social justice,
categories that were considered to be the voters of the right.
There is something that I've always found interesting in Podemos,
when they say that they don't want to speak to traditional leftwing voters only.
They also want to convince people who have always voted for the rightwing  Partido Popular.
To them, these voters are also under the domination of capitalism, and Podemos wants to convince them.
In some way, neoliberal policies enlarge the constituency of a leftwing project,
which explains why we should not use the traditional right-left split,
but this split remains important for making a distinction between different types of populism.
Another aspect of leftwing populism concerns this need to set down a chain of equivalences between heterogeneous demands.
We discussed this issue in "Hegemony and Socialist Strategy",
when we said that the left needed to rephrase the socialist project around the idea of the radicalization of democracy
because the demands of workers are not the only one that matter for an emancipation project,
there are also feminist, environmental, anti-racist or gay right demands.
This is what we meant when we talked about the need to set down a chain of equivalences between these demands.
Setting down this chain is what we mean by building a people,
which is why traditional Marxist categories are no longer efficient for the development of an emancipation project,
because many democratic demands do not stem from relations of production.
It is important to articulate these heterogeneous demands
and it is important to build this movement...
I prefer the idea of a movement because I consider leftwing populism should not be a political party.
It could include a party-like aspect,
but it should connect social movements with the party-like aspect,
because many of these demands that should be articulated through this people, this progressive, collective 'we',
are expressed through social movements,
and it would not be possible to connect them through a political party.
We should find a way to conect these social movements to a more traditional organization,
and on this point I disagree with many lefties who advocate an horizontal organization
and who think society can be transformed through social movements only,
that think that everything that is concerned with the transformation of the state is necessarily a bad thing.
This is why I disagree with Tony Negri and Michael Hardt's idea of what they call exodus, desertion,
a notion that refuses everything that is concerned with transforming the state, instutions,
everything that looks like a party or a union.
They want to build a new society outside institutions.
I rather share Gramsci's idea of positional warfare.
We need to get involved in institutions and transform them from within,
we need to seize power and transform the state,
as Syriza or Podemos tried or try to transform the state.
This strategy is different from the social democrat strategy
that seeks to enter institutions to reproduce them, not to transform them.
On the other hand, there is the radical left that either refuses to use institutions or wants to destroy them.
A leftwing populist strategy seeks to seize power in order to transform society
but this entails a party-like aspect, Podemos calls it an electoral war engine, as well as social movements.
This is really important to me.
Leftwing populism is a new way of conceiving the left,
that neither looks like social democracy nor the far left.
This is why I fight, theorically of course, for a new way of conceiving the left
that leaves the traditional political splits behind.
CV: What a considerable programme! Jean-Luc?
JLM: You give us a lot to think about! I won't be able to tackle all these issues...
First, I will try to call your attention to...
The grass is always greener on the other side,
but I would like to remind you that the Podemos experience has nothing to do with Syriza,
and that the Syriza experience has nothing to do with Die Linke, and so on.
The evolution of ideas is embodied by political movements.
It is a bit late, but if you will,
I could tell you some other time about how things evolved
from Europe to Latin America, from Latin America back to Europe, from the emergence of Podemos
to the necrosis of the French Left Front, that turned into a tiny cartel of parties
and to the original political project that we are trying to build, based on a new type of theory
that I developed in my books "The Age of the People" and "Choosing Rebeliousness".
But this new theory that I developed does not leave the tools of the past behind.
I disagree with Chantal on this point,
because I built my theory on Marxism, and I consider myself a sort of Marxian,
meaning the tools of historical materialism...
What is Marxism? A friend of mine had a witty way of answering this question.
He said Marxism was a production of the Moscow Institute of Historical Materialism.
He meant that some people had built a fixed doctrine based on very different texts,
but to me, Marxism explains history through the use of historical materialism,
that used laws that need to be updated.
For instance Marxist determinism is necessarily that of Simon Laplace,
and it does not leave room for uncertainty.
Nowadays, we understand determinism as a probabilist idea.
I will spare you a lecture, but this entails various consequences,
like the importance of the minor incident I was speaking of, that linear determinism does not take into account.
All these philosophical notions had a role in the development of the theory of the citizens' revolution,
and we drew them from concrete experiences.
So, the issue of setting down a division is always concerned with consciousness.
The salaried class did not disappear, the salariat even spread to society as a whole
in an economic model that leaves no room for entire sectors of society.
These sectors are either learning,
for the reason that the educational standards of today's society are higher than they have ever been,
or because these sectors were dismissed from production
because productivity gains decreased the required volume of work
that has been disorderly distributed between the unemployed and the exploited that work more and more and more.
The very structure of society sets down a division.
The division between 'we' and 'they' is an objective reality.
'They' are the oligarchs and the caste
and 'we' are all those who do not belong to this category, those with ever-disparate social statuses,
disparate because the system itself individualized employment contracts.
Therefore job insecurity, the multiplication of social status, uberization brought about the explosion of the former working class,
but don't tell me it was easier to build a 'we' before because the working class was more homogeneous.
It was not! And those who say it was were not activists in this period!
Creating class consciousness was a very difficult thing to do.
CM: That's not what I'm saying.
JLM: I didn't say you did, I'm not blaming you. CM: I want this to be clear...
JLM: I know Chantal, but I'm not blaming you, I'm blaming those who used to say...
Back when I was at the Socialist Party – let us all join in a common loathing –
some people used to tell me "You know, pal, society changed, the situation is different". Well the former situation was very difficult too!
I was a political activist before, and when we were supporting the Common Programme
among a working class that was half-dominated by rightwing networks, well it was very difficult!
Because of paternalism, we were a minority in the Peugeot factory of Montbéliard,
although workers there were all doing assembly-line works in harsh conditions.
Class consciousness was the result of a self-definition, which leads us back to the previous discussion.
People should now self-define themselves.
You won't convince them if you merely base your argument on their social condition,
because social conditions are very disparate. The consciousness of one's particular condition does not produce a 'we'.
Which is why we are trying to tackle the issue from another angle, that of the main contradiction of our age,
the contradiction that leads us to the destruction of our ecosystem.
If productivist capitalism, which does not produce any norm of self-organization, destroys our ecosystem,
then there is a human, anticapitalist public interest.
For the first time, progressives and anticapitalists can appropriate the notion of human public interest,
that includes the largest amount of categories in society that can join the 'we' against 'they'.
'They' are the poisoners, the developers of productivist agriculture, those who destroy the planet,
while we are those who just want to live and have simple pleasures,
those who are absolutely opposed to what 'they' want to do with us.
There is no contradiction in setting down a division with the tools of the past
but the division cannot be set along the same lines.
It does not mean that the realities they described no longer exist,
it means that they have become so common to almost everyone that it no longer makes any sense.
This is why I suggest to build new hegemonies through the idea of environmental planning for instance,
or the idea of an eco-humanism that reshapes  progressive ideals into the human public interest.
This leads me to my conclusion.
The left and the right are a reality, it's obvious.
But their reality does not come from the words used to describe them, these words are corrupted.
People think with words, and as long as they think that the left means Hollande they cannot think.
And when someone presents himself as the left, people say
"Wait a minute, the other guy is also from the left. Are you both from the left?"
Then you have to answer the other guy is from the right, but what are you then, the real left?
We discuss this issue a lot with Podemos. If we accept their lateralization, we will be called the far left in the blink of an eye,
there will be the left, the real left, the false left, the far left, the not really lefty left... Anyway!
The issue is not about negating or refusing the word 'left',
nor is it about some sort of hazy fantasy about going beyond the left.
The issue is about rebuilding the left's roots,
or, more precisely, about rebuilding  the roots of what was called called the left.
This root is made of two ideas: sovereignty and citizenship.
We need to grab this root and make it grow towards the idea of the human public interest,
and then the left can be built again.
Here we might disagree, but the issue is not only about rethinking the left intellectually,
it is also about building it again concretely. This is why my strategy, sorry but I need to talk about it at some point,
is not about gathering the left, I oppose this idea.
Of course this strategy is ambiguous. I want to gather lefties together, but not only!
Of course I want to gather lefties together! CM: We agree on this point.
JLM: Yes, I know, but I'm not arguing with you, I'm arguing with my general.
CM: But you just said we might disagree on this point.
JLM: Ok then, we agree, it's a good thing.
I'm serious, I don't want to start a fight, I have enough disputes with other people!
I mean I don't want to start a fight with my friends.
Anyway, I cannot say I want to gather 'the left' because that would mean making an alliance with the Socialist Party,
and that's precisely what I don't want to do.
This is the difficulty of real, everyday struggle. So what is my strategy?
It is exactly what you described, meaning the crystalization of heterogeneous demands,
and I use the expression of uniting the people,
and this is not the same as gathering the left.
It means rebuilding the left through the union of the people around its aspirations.
Carefully choosing our words is of the utmost importance, I totally agree with you.
If I ever say that I want to gather the left, well let me tell you that the battle is already lost.
If I do so, people will not understand I want to gather progressives together,
they will understand that I want to make an alliance with schemers and they'll think I'm like all the others.
You see, our problem is that they stole the words we used.
Therefore, we need to create new words all the time in order to create a 'we'.
If we say 'left', people understand 'Socialist Party'
If we say 'uniting the people', people understand something else,
for instance, when I take the subway, because I do take the subway, there is always someone who tells me
"Oh you are doing the same as we do"
so I answer "What do you mean by 'as we do'?", "Well, us, you know..." He means normal people.
That's what Chantal means by populism,
for this guy, normal people are those who take the subway, and not the others.
I don't know what he thinks about people who do not take the subway, because some of them are with us,
but that's the idea.
So this was my conclusion.
If there was one thing that I'd like to ask to people who are here tonight,
it would be that you take into account the fact that we do not improvise, and if we do, it is in the artistic sense,
meaning that ideas we have turn into action.
But a movement like 'La France Insoumise'
or the idea of the age of the people
all stem from the theory that we built based on the concrete revolutionary experiences,
and the constituent assembly is my... I mean our revolutionary strategy.
It will enable us to give birth to the people as a body politic through educational conflictuality,
meaning that the constituent assembly will be opposed to particular political interests
and will be in favour of the public interest expressed by the 'we'.
We are lucky to be 'the people', and this cannot be translated in any other language.
In France, people use to say "If everyone was doing the same as you do, what a mess it would be!".
This implies that what cannot be done by everyone is not a good thing.
The root of the French people is equality, and this goes far back in the past,
and we owe that to our glorious ancestors and their beautiful mottos.
We need to use this egalitarian history.
CM: Do you mean the Gauls? JLM: Gauls were in no way egalitarian people, they are really not a role model!
CM: This was a joke about what Nicolas Sarkozy said about the ancestors of the French.
CV: So... Do you have something to say Chantal?
CM: I agree with the idea of uniting the people in order to rebuild the left.
[Applauds] CV: I think we can thank both our guests
whose debate was very interesting.
Organizing this debate was not easy, because it covered many different intellectual and theoratical issues.
We saw that philosophy can sometimes help us change the world as Jean-Luc said later.
I hope you enjoyed. This was the first time that Chantal and Jean-Luc had a debate in France
and I think you enjoyed their ideas and the theory they developed
as well as the relation between Chantal'sidea of populism and Jean-Luc's idea of uniting the people,
that do not always match on every issue, but the idea was to show the main points and the differences of their theory.
Maybe we will organize another debate in 2017
when the people will be mobilized and active, when it will have seize power,
we will be able to see the concrete application of their populist theory.
Anyway, thank you everyone, sorry for being behind schedule.
The Mémoire des luttes association was pleased to welcome you her, I must say that we are sorry
that we had could not welcome everyone who wanted to come tonight
because many people wanted to come.
Before we leave, you should know that we shot a video of the debate
that will be broadcast on the website of the association and on Jean-Luc's Youtube channel.
I don't know when but it will be broadcast on the media of the people.
Good night!